# CSCE_5200_NLP_Resume_Screener_ChatBot_Project
Final project abstract for CSCE 5200 course in Information Retrieval and Web Search at University of North Texas:

The goal of this project is to design an automated solution that can assist the HR function with screening resumes and will also utilize a Chatbot to conduct pre-screening interviews with potential candidates for company job postings. According to an article published by ideal.com, on average it takes around 23 hours to screen resumes for one job posting. Additionally, when a job posting receives around 250 resumes – around 75% to 88% are unqualified and do not meet the qualifications required in the job posting. The resources devoted to this manual process can constrain the HR department and can ultimately result in bad hiring decisions, increased costs, poor employee performance, and higher employee turnover.
Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS) have been developed over the years to assist with screening resumes through key word matching and ranking of potential candidates. Based on the job posting, the ATS will define certain key words that are relevant to the job posting (examples: Python coding, project management, SAP implementation, etc). The ATS will then scan through the resumes and parse out key words from each resume. The ATS will determine a match score between the key words found from the resumes and the key words relevant to the job posting. The ATS will then rank the resumes based on the match score between the resume key words and job posting key words. This project will aim to develop an ATS system that can assist with parsing through resumes and ranking the best matches to a given job description.
       
Based on the qualified resumes selected, HR will then need to conduct pre-screening interviews with the potential job candidates. This is also a time-intensive process for the HR department and can result in delayed hiring decisions that can reflect poorly on an organization. A Chatbot can assist with this process by conducting the pre-screening interview with potential job candidates on behalf of the HR department. The Chatbot can ask basic questions such as:
• What is the earliest date you are available to interview?
• What is your ideal work environment (hybrid, on-site, remote)?
• What is your contact information (phone, email, address)?
By having the Chatbot conduct the pre-screening interviews, HR should have more time to focus on conducting the final interviews and onboard the successful candidate(s).
